---
title: DH Inside Out - Mini-conference at DH2024
slug: dh-inside-out-dh2024
date: 2023-12-19T09:00:15-04:00
author: DHTech
thumbnail: /images/posts/dh2024-mini-conf.png
featureImage: /images/posts/dh2024-mini-conf.png
featureImageAlt: Screenshot of the DH2024 website
summary: DHTech will hold a mini-conference at DH2024 themed “**DH Inside Out**”. Typical DH conference presentations are focussed on the research with a slight nod to the technical details; we want to flip that format and dive more deeply into the technical aspects of the work, while still keeping it in context of the research and domain specifics.
tags:
- WhatsHappening
---

# Call for Submissions

From August 6-9, 2024, [DH2024](https://dh2024.adho.org/) will be held at George Mason University in Arlington, Virginia, USA. DHTech will hold a mini-conference at DH2024 themed “**DH Inside Out**”. Typical DH conference presentations are focussed on the research with a slight nod to the technical details; we want to flip that format and dive more deeply into the technical aspects of the work, while still keeping it in context of the research and domain specifics. To that end, we invite submissions of interest to the people who work on the technical aspects of DH projects, such as:
- implementation and design specifics of packages and applications
- lessons learnt regarding the design and implementation of research software
- tool demonstrations from a technical perspective
- community and diversity topics specific to the technical DH community.

Submissions should specify the desired format:

- **Presentations**: 20 minute talks including Q&A with the audience.
- **Tool presentations**: 10 minutes demonstrations followed by 10 minutes discussion with the audience.
- **Other**: do you have a format in mind you would like to try out? Please describe the format including length and audience engagement.

Submissions should be 500 to 750 words in length. Links to relevant code and packages should be provided in the submission.

Submission deadline is **March 15, 2024**. Please submit using [this form](https://form.jotform.com/233466066208053). Please be aware, we may ask you to resubmit to a different platform depending on the number of submissions we receive.

# Call for Reviewers

We are looking for reviewers for submission to "DH Inside Out". If you are willing to review two to three submissions between March 15 and March 31, 2024, please sign up using [this form](https://forms.gle/jFiU21CK4kAGpeRm9).